---
title: "Enhance your forms with Alpine.js"
date: 2023-09-07
published: true
author: victor
tags:
  - Alpine.js
categories:
  - Frontend
excerpt: "How to prefill forms with data from the local storage"
---

The challenge is to create a user-friendly form that automatically stores all user input in the browser's local storage,
ensuring that when the user loses the internet connection, their previously entered information is not lost.

## The form

Let's create a simple form in html as a starting point, before we can enhance it.
Don't think about styling it for now, you can always do that later.
Also, I left out the field **errors**, **hidden_fields** and **non_field_errors** since they are not relevant for this post, but make sure to include them for a good user experience.

```html
<form>
    {% csrf_token %}

    {% for field in form.visible_fields %}
        {{ field.label }}: {{ field }}
        <p>{{ visible_field.errors }}</p>
    {% endfor %}
    <button>Submit</button>
</form>
```

For a form we will just use a classic Django form:

```python
class AwesomeForm(forms.Form):
    first_name = forms.CharField()
    last_name = forms.CharField()
```

## Introduce Alpine.js

Download the minimized Alpine.js file, put it into your *statics* folder and load it in your `<head>`:

```html
{% load static %}
<head>
    ...
    <script src="{% static 'alpine.min.js' %}" defer></script>
</head>
```

Now what we want to do is create an Alpine component by setting the [x-data](https://alpinejs.dev/directives/data) attribute to the `<form>` element with some random values:

```html
<form x-data="{id_first_name: 'Harry', id_last_name: 'Potter'}">
    ...
</form>
```

And the attribute [x-model](https://alpinejs.dev/directives/model) to the input field, which binds the value of an `<input>` field to the Alpine data defined above:

```html
<input type="text" id="id_first_name" name="first_name" x-model="id_first_name">
```

The problem is that by using Django's templating language to autogenerate the `<input>` field,
we cannot set arbitrary attributes from within the template.
Here is where a prominent Django package comes in handy.

## Introduce django-widget-tweaks

[django-widget-tweaks](https://github.com/jazzband/django-widget-tweaks#django-widget-tweaks) is a popular package in the Django community that allows you to add attributes for form fields inside the template on the fly.
So to achieve the `<input>` field with the attribute as described before, we can do:

```jinja
{% raw %}
{% for field in form.visible_fields %}
    {{ field.label }}: {% render_field field x-model=field.id_for_label %}
    <p>{{ visible_field.errors }}</p>
{% endfor %}
{% endraw %}
```

So now when we load our form, the values "Harry" and "Potter" are prefilled in the input fields.

## Introduce localStorage

Now we want to save the value of an `<input>` field to the localStorage every time it changes.
For that we can use the [x-on:change](https://alpinejs.dev/directives/on) attribute that calls a function `updateLocalStorage` every time an input changes[^onchange].

```jinja
{% raw %}
{% render_field field x-model=field.id_for_label x-on::change="updateLocalStorage" %}
{% endraw %}
```

```javascript
function updateLocalStorage(evt) {
    const id = evt.target.id
    localStorage[id] = evt.target.value
}
```

## Prefill data from localStorage

To do this, we need to change the **x-data** attribute of the form to:

```html
<form x-data="{id_first_name: localStorage.getItem('id_first_name'), id_last_name: localStorage.getItem('id_last_name')}">
    ...
</form>
```

This will get the value for the input field from the local storage and fill it in the `<input>` field, since it is bound to that value with **x-model**.

## Limitations

* You have to specify every field separately inside the **x-data** attribute, but *you can* extend it to arbitrary fields with some templating skills.
* Currently the `localStorage.getItem(...)` will override any initial values set for the form field. Make sure you account for that too.

[^onchange]: Note that for *django-widget-tweaks* we need to set the attribute as `x-on::change` with a double colon.
