---
layout: post
title: "Deploy your app on a VM"
date: 2023-07-03
published: true
author: victor
tags:
  - pyenv
  - pip
  - git
  - basics
categories:
  - Production deployment
---

If you don't know how to do it without *Ansible*, then *Ansible* won't help you either.

## Git

I assume you have already [installed *Git*](https://github.com/git-guides/install-git), 
created a repository on *GitHub* and pushed your project.
The next step is to get the code onto the VM.
If it is a public repository, you will have no problem accessing the repository from inside your VM.
If it is a private repository, you can generate an access token with which you can pull the code:

* Go to [Settings > Personal Access Tokens](https://github.com/settings/tokens){:target="_blank"}
* Generate a personal access token (classic) with repo scope enabled.
* Clone like this: `git clone https://MY_TOKEN@github.com/user-or-org/repo`

`git clone` has several options, two of which I consider particularly useful:
* you can specify the tag / branch you want to checkout with the option `--branch` (or `-b`)
* you can reduce the amount of files that are cloned with `--depth 1`

Now you can copy your application's source code from `src` or wherever that is, to `/srv/my_app/`.
The next thing we are going to do is to install the python dependencies.

## Set up the python environment

I assume you have already [installed *pyenv*][pyenv-install] inside your VM.
Now you can set up a virtual environment for your application with:

```bash
pyenv install 3.11.3
pyenv virtualenv 3.11.3 my_app
pyenv activate my-app
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

This will create a new python environment inside `$PYENV_ROOT/versions/3.11.3/envs/my_app` with your application's requirements.
Now inside your app's directory `/srv/my_app/` create a `.env` file.
Here, you can specify the location of your virtual environment with

```init
VIRTUAL_ENV=$PYENV_ROOT/versions/3.10.6/envs/my_app-0.1.0
```

Be careful that the environment variable `$PYENV_ROOT` might not be defined when you start your application with *Systemd*,
so you should specify the absolute path to your virtual environment.

## Further reading

The rest is described in [this post]({% link _posts/2023-06-25-supervisor.md%}#systemd) how to set up a *Systemd* service that runs your application.
If you follow along, you will have your application running on port 80 inside your VM.
The next step is to automate the entire process with *Ansible*.

[pyenv-install]: https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv#installation