---
layout: post
title: "Static files"
date: 2023-08-07
published: true
author: victor
tags:
  - css
  - javascript
  - fonts
categories:
  - Production deployment
---

Static files are JavaScript, CSS and every other files that are served by your web server and are not HTML.

## Development

During development, the `runserver` command takes care of serving them, as long as `staticfiles` is in your INSTALLED_APPS.
In the console we can see how the individual files are accessed.

## Production

Sometimes it's totally fine to use "runserver" for your application event in production, in case you have low traffic, and the application is not publicly accessible.
But most of the time, the application will be run by gunicorn, and we need to serve the media and static files by ourselves.

I am aware of three viable options at the time of writing:

### Whitenoise

This can be feasible for small scale applications without a lot of traffic. But it is also scalable with a caching solution such as Cloudflare. This way, your web server is only hit once, to initially fetch the resource, and any further requests will hit the cache.

### Web Server (e.g. Nginx)

This requires you to set up a Nginx server, which is not without its caveats.
I would suggest this approach, only if the first one hits some performance issues.

### Cloud storage (e.g. S3)

You could do this, but I wouldn't recommend to do it without caching, through a service such as Cloudfront or Cloudflare for example.
S3 Buckets have fast response times only when requested from the same region, and when there are not many requests.
But every request costs money, so you might be surprised by a huge bill at the end of the month.

So:

Use a Cloud storage only in combination with a CDN!
