---
layout: post
title: "Automate deployment with Ansible"
date: 2023-07-10
published: true
author: victor
tags:
  - ansible
  - advanced
categories:
  - Production deployment
---

## Provisioning

The provisioning step sets up the host and installs all required third party software that your application relies on.
In this step you might want to install typical software like *Git*, *Supervisor*, *Pyenv*, *Nginx*, *etc...*
You also want to set up a separate user for your app, separate from the one that you use to ssh on the node, to isolate the application from the rest of the system and not accidently allow it to perform actions with superuser privileges.
I like to give the user the same name as my app to avoid any confusion.

The steps to achieve this have already been described in previous posts, but here is the summary:
1. Update package lists
2. Create a user and a group that will be the owner of all application related files and folders
3. Install *git*, which is required to clone our repository from *GitHub*. We could also pull it locally, and copy it over to the host, but this takes generally longer.
4. Install *pyenv* as described [in this post]({% link _posts/2023-06-10-virtualbox.md %})

<p>
<details>
    <summary>Here is how my <b>provision.yml</b> would look like</summary>
    <script src="https://gist.github.com/movileanuv/65b56269df13008601e908afeb91ea01.js"></script>
</details>
</p>

Now that you have set up your host, you can proceed to deploying your application to the remote host.

## Deployment

During deployment you make sure that your application's source code is transfered to the remote host and all third party software is configured in such a way that they are able to interact with each other and your application.
As described in [*Deploy your app on a VM*]({% link _posts/2023-06-28-pyenv-pip.md%}#transfor-your-code-to-the-vm) you have three options:
1. You clone your code locally and **copy it to the remote host**
2. You create a ssh key on your remote host and add it to your **[SSH keys](https://github.com/settings/keys) in GitHub**
3. You create a **personal access token** and clone your repo directly from the remote host
I won't go into more details with the second method since it is pretty straightforward.
The other two have interesting implications though, that are worth taken a look at in more detail:
* How can you set the correct **file permissions** when copying files with Ansible?
* How can you **encrypt secrets* like the the access token during playbook execution?

### Copy files to the remote host with Ansible

The biggest issue I had when following this approach is setting the correct file permissions.
For this you have to understand the concept between Ansible's variables `ansible_user`, `ansible_become`, `become` and `become_user`.
* `ansible_user` is the user with which you can log in to the remote host and you have set up as of [*Set up a VirtualBox VM*]({% link _posts/2023-06-10-virtualbox.md %}) 
* `ansible_become` can be set on inventory level, and tells Ansible that for this host, every action should be performed as if the variable `become` is set to "true". Else, every action is perfomed as the `ansible_user` on the remote host
* `become` tells Ansible that it should become a specific user, and this is **root** in case `become_user` is not specified
* `become_user` specifies the specific user that Ansible should *become*, for the execution of the task, block, playbook or role. Obviously, this user should also be present on the remote host, which should have been set up during the provisioning step.

If this concept is clear, then you can easily copy your files from your local machine to the remote host in three steps (make sure to read the code comments):
1. Check out the desired version (branch, tag or commit hash) on your local machine
2. Create a directory on the remote host
3. Copy the files from your local host to that directory

<script src="https://gist.github.com/movileanuv/72a375ba9650f9d5e860e2cb3965148b.js"></script>

### Clone private repository from GitHub

In the post [*Deploy your app on a VM*]({% link _posts/2023-06-28-pyenv-pip.md %}#clone-from-vcs) I have described how to create an access token for GitHub, with which you can pull the code from private repositories.
Like other secrets and passwords, you don't want to keep them in plain text, especially not if you plan to push your ansible repo into some VCS.
Ansible comes on installation with something called **ansible-vault** that lets you encrypt strings and contents of files, and decrypts it during playbook execution.
To encrypt your access token for example, you could execute something like:
```
ansible-vault encrypt_string --vault-id @prompt "..." --name "vault_github_access_token"
```

Then, inside your playbook, you could have a task that checks out the repository like this one:

```yaml
- name: Deploy app
  hosts:
    - vbox

  tasks:
    - name: Clone repo
      become: true
      become_user: "{{ APP_USER }}"
      ansible.builtin.git:
        repo: "https://{{ vault_github_access_token }}@github.com/<GitHub username>/<repo name>.git"
        version: "{{ VERSION }}"
        dest: "/path/to/repo/"

    ...
```

And you can execute the playbook with `ansible-playbook playbooks/django-sandbox/deploy.yml --ask-vault-password`.

> Notice that **--vault-id @prompt** and **--ask-vault-password** are equivalent methods of telling *ansible-vault* that it should use the ***default* vault-id**.
> You can specify specify different vault-ids like this: `--vault-id production@prompt`.

### 

...
Now that you have described all the steps required to deploy your application, you can execute the playbook with ... and deploy your application

## Final notes

Your application is now running on <IP address> as you can see in your browser.
...
Continue reading the following posts to add additional improvements to your application.
